---
title: "Enhanced emulation of cosmological density fields based on dictionary learning"
collection: publications
category: unpublished
excerpt: 'This paper explores dimension reduction techniques for ML cosmology emulation'
slidesurl: 'https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1iMj00Pfvox2XUjQHz3PpDlcuN-UyWb_dTCf0OafHEak/edit?usp=sharing'
paperurl: 'https://drive.google.com/file/d/1srDvusuEYoJRQT1Ctka89B9GAjKDA8Bp/view?usp=sharing'
---
N-body simulations are one of the most widely used cosmological tools for studying large-scale structure formation in the universe. However, running n-body simulations directly requires considerable computational overhead that is intractable for higher-resolution runs and parameter optimization. To address these time constraints, machine learning emulators have been created to directly predict simulation outputs with a high degree of accuracy, especially for single-parameter cases. However, many emulators use inflexible or inefficient data representations for the predicted simulation snapshots. We propose a new method for representing N-body simulations through dictionary learning, which involves learning through an iterative optimization algorithm a set of elements similar to bases but with the flexibility of having linearly dependent, non-orthogonal components subject to any set of user-defined constraints. A machine learning algorithm is then trained on a sparse linear combination of these components to create an efficient emulation pipeline. Based on analysis of the power spectrum and CPU runtimes of both dictionary learning emulation pipelines and PCA emulation pipelines, numerous benefits from dictionary learning were achieved. We show that dictionary learning matches or even outperforms PCA with certain numbers of components even while having positivity constraints to ensure better cosmological interpretability for the raw overdensities being modeled. We also show that dictionary learning allows for increased complexity in cases with small sample sizes or dimensionalities where PCA is limited by the singular values in SVD. Finally, we show that dictionary learning has lower latency for CPU runtimes compared to PCA methods. Based on these results, dictionary learning shows a lot of potential for cosmology and scientific computing in terms of allowing for fine-grained control of the data representation while maintaining performance compared to traditional methods.
